---
title: "Extra! Extra! Merger in the Arts"
created_at: 2018-09-10 12:00:00 +0000
author: Rebecca Thomas
layout: post
categories:
- sustainability
- capitalization
- mergers
comments: true
---
_Myth_: Arts organizations don&rsquo;t merge well.

_Truth_: When strategy, leadership and finances are aligned, unity has the potential to be
catalytic.

Last week, two national arts service organizations &mdash; the National Center for Arts
Research (NCAR) at Southern Methodist University (SMU) and DataArts &mdash; announced
their merger, becoming SMU DataArts.   

As a longtime trustee of DataArts and a member of the advisory committee for NCAR,
I&rsquo;m excited about the prospect of stronger data tools and resources for arts and
culture organizations. I also see the combination as an example to the sector of a merger
dance well choreographed. 

What factors made it possible for these two organizations to unite?  I highlight six here.

<!--more-->

1. __Clear, compelling strategic fit and complementary products__. In the words of
NCAR&rsquo;s Director, Zannie Voss: &ldquo;We complete each other.&rdquo; DataArts has
been a primary source of financial and program data for NCAR since the research
center&rsquo;s launch in 2013. NCAR brings to the partnership a deep bench of professional
and graduate student researchers who help the field make sense of this information. Both
organizations create educational resources and data management tools that arts leaders and
grantmakers use to derive insights and inform policies and programs. SMU DataArts has the
potential to expand the field&rsquo;s engagement with data, by amplifying the role of the
arts in society and strengthening the everyday decisions of individual arts groups and
their supporters.

2. __Emergence of one clear leader__. Merger explorations often end almost as quickly as
they start over questions of leadership. In arts organizations, in particular, mission and
vision can be inseparable from a charismatic leader who may not see exit as a planned or
desired legacy. At DataArts, we didn&rsquo;t face this obstacle. The organization&rsquo;s
visionary leader, Beth Tuttle &mdash; who shepherded DataArts through a spin-off from the
Pew Charitable Trusts and spearheaded its growth into a national service organization
&mdash; had already moved on as part of a planned transition.  In its interim leader,
DataArts found an impassioned individual to explore future business scenarios, which led
the organization to a planned combination with NCAR. As merger discussions progressed, the
Board embraced NCAR&rsquo;s Director, Zannie Voss, as the clear future leader of our
combined entity.

3. __Board buy-in and participation__. In strategic planning discussions and the ensuing
merger exploration, DataArts&rsquo; board members worked double duty. In small committees,
we explored strategic scenarios, probed business assumptions, and considered other
leadership possibilities. As the merger became an exciting and feasible prospect, our
current and former Board Chairs led a deeply inquisitive process in collaboration with
NCAR and its parent, SMU. The merger was never a foregone conclusion for our board &mdash;
but the success of the process gave us confidence in the potential of the combination. At
NCAR, the advisory board participated in a set of similarly robust analyses and
conversations. NCAR&rsquo;s Director has invited DataArts&rsquo; entire board to become
advisors of the combined organization &mdash; a testament to our shared vision of a
data-empowered sector.

4. __Willingness to make tough decisions__. When combining, organizations have a
responsibility to look hard at overlapping costs.  Often, they find redundant functions
in marketing, finance, fundraising, and technology. Yet nonprofits understandably go to
great lengths to avoid separating from dedicated, mission-driven staff.  While preserving
the status quo feels just, it carries real risks. Staff can become demoralized when their
job responsibilities seem unclear or duplicative. Finances can weaken when the combined
revenue from two partners falls short of merged costs. As part of the NCAR-DataArts
combination, the two organizations made changes to their staff structures, for the
long-term health of the mission. These changes were far from easy. Leadership handled them
with compassion: separated staff received significant notice, generous severance packages,
job leads from board members, professional development support, and time on the job for
interviews.  

5. __Access to change capital__. As national intermediaries, DataArts and NCAR have
benefited from the generosity of national and local grantmakers at pivotal moments of
transition and growth. During this next big moment of change, the combined organization
will need to raise multi-year, flexible capital as it climbs an inevitable learning curve
that involves integrating programs, cultures, skills, technologies, and spaces. Change
capital can pay for one-time merger-related expenses in areas such as strategy consulting,
communications, severance, etc. It can also give a merged organization a few years of
&ldquo;runway&rdquo; to test or expand new program and business strategies before they
sustain themselves. Through a fundraising campaign targeting individuals and foundations,
the two institutions are making progress toward their change capital goal. 

6. __Complementary business models, stable balance sheets__. Frequently, organizations
seek to merge out of financial desperation; one financially weak party gets subsumed by a
somewhat less weak partner.  The result is usually a larger, weak organization.  In the
case of this merger, NCAR is backed by the financial weight of a major university; it also
has a strong pipeline of individual donors who are eager to support its research. DataArts
brings to the partnership strong relationships with local and national grantmakers and
cash reserves built through regular planned surpluses and special fundraising.  Certainly,
the two organizations will continue to face real business challenges in a field that needs
research and data insights but can&rsquo;t fully charge cash-strapped cultural
organizations for data services. During integration, SMU DataArts must continue to seek
creative ways to build paying demand for new or improved tools and resources, thereby
identifying recurring reliable earned and contributed revenue to sustain itself for the
long term.

Undoubtedly, SMU DataArts will encounter many surprises in the few years ahead.  In my
experience advising organizations on financial strategy and planning, I see that even the
best conceived plans rarely go according to plan.  But I&rsquo;m optimistic that these two
organizations have emerged from their data-driven courtship and engagement ready
to create a family of data-savvy cultural leaders. 
